# Library design README
This subdirectory describes the design of the H1N1 library, including details on the barcoded HA expression plasmid and the rationale for the strains chosen for the library.

For in depth description of the design of protein sequences included in the sequencing-based neutralization assay library, please see preprint by [Loes et al (2024)](https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.03.08.584176).

## Barcoded construct design
Breifly, the barcoded HA sequences included in the library are generated by making several modifications to the HA segment, allowing the HA ectodomain of a strain of interest to be incorporated within the HA segment of the lab-adapted A/WSN/1933 strain. This is done because all non-HA viral segments for the viruses included in the library originate from the lab-adapted A/WSN/1933 (H1N1) strain, both for practical and biosafety reasons. We therefore use the packaging signals from WSN on the HA segment, as these packaging signals extend into the HA coding sequence, the resulting HA for each incorporated strain is contains the unmodified ectodomain of a recent strain with the signal peptide and endodomain of WSN:

- The noncoding region at the 3’ end of the vRNA as well as the first 67 nucleotides of the coding sequence are constant on each HA, and originate from the lab-adapted A/WSN/1933 (H1N1) strain. Therefore, the full signal peptide from WSN HA is used in the final constructs.
- In addition, both the transmembrane domain, as well as the cytoplasmic tail are from the homologous 46 amino-acid region from the WSN strain followed by a pair of consecutive stop codons (144 nucleotides, stop codons not indicated in schematic). Synonymous mutations were introduced within this region to remove the packaging signals without altering the encoded protein in the last 105 nucleotides of this region.
- A 16-nucleotide barcode is incorporated immediately following the double stop-codon at the end of the coding sequence this is followed by an Illumina read 1 sequence.
- Lastly, downstream of the coding sequence is the intact duplicated packaging signal region of the WSN virus (spanning the last 105 nucleotides of the coding sequence and the 45 nucleotide 5’ noncoding region of the WSN viral RNA). A stop codon was introduced within the coding region of the duplicated WSN packaging signal so if there was homologous recombination between the duplicated region that removed the barcode, the resulting HA protein would be truncated and so non-functional.

## Recent strain selection for H1N1 library for 2023-2024 season
To select recent strains for inclusion into the library which would represent the diversity of strains circulating in the Fall of 2023. Working in collaboration with the John Huddleston from the Bedford lab, I selected 58 recent haplotypes as defined on a Nextstrain tree build from November 2023. Haplotypes were chosen for inclusion if they either had at least 20 observations or at least 5 observations since June of 2023. The Nextstrain tree from which these were selected can be found here: https://nextstrain.org/seasonal-flu/h1n1pdm/ha/6m@2023-11-16.

In addition, we included the cell-based vaccine strains for H1N1 since the 2009 H1N1 pandemic (A/California/07/2009, A/Michigan/45/2015. A/Brisbane/02/2018, A/Hawaii/70/2019, A/Wisconsin/588/2019, and A/Wisconsin/67/2022). We were unable to grow the A/Victoria/4897/2022-like lacking the R142K reversion that was observed in a high-growth reassortment, however were able to incorporate a A/Victoria/4897/2022-like strain containing the R142K reversion (A/Victoria/4897/2022_IVR238). In addition, in order to better understand the effect of the R142K on antigenicity, we also incorporated a strain (A/Oregon/Flu-OHSU-241140095/2023) that only differed from one of the strains selected as a common haplotype (A/Michigan/MISAPPHIREL365374393/2023) at position 142. By including this additional strain, we are able to examine the effect of R142K on neutralization by comparing titers against A/Michigan/MISAPPHIREL365374393/2023 and A/Oregon/Flu-OHSU-241140095/2023. In addition, this strain allows us to assess the impact of the Q223R egg-associated mutation on titers, as it is otherwise identical at the amino acid level to A/Victoria/4897/2022_IVR238; the only difference is the absence of the Q223R mutation in the A/Oregon/Flu-OHSU-241140095/2023 strain.

## Protein sequences provided
We provided the following alignment files which show the protein sequences for the strains included in the library. The following files are provided in the sequences directory:
 - The full length protein sequences of the HAs as they are present in the library. These are the HA protein sequences containing the first 20 and last 46 amino acids from A/WSN/1933 (H1N1) and the ectodomain from the recent HA strain of interest that are incorporated in the barcoded HA segment: 2023-2024_H1_library_full-length_proteins_withWSNflanks_withvaccinestrains.fas
 - The protein sequences for the ectodomains of the HAs incorporated into the library. These are the region of the protein sequence for each HA ectodomain that was trimmed and incorporated into the barcoded HA segment. The starting amino acid is HA1 position 4: 2023-2024_H1_library_protein_HA_ectodomain_withvaccinestrains.fas
 - The protein sequences for the HA1 sequences for the HAs from strains incorporated into the library. Note that HA1 position 3 is fixed at the WSN amino-acid at this site (isoleucine) rather than the leucine observed in recent circulating sequences in order to maintain the entire WSN packaging signal. Therefore, in this file the HA1s start at position 4: 2023-2024_H1_library_protein_HA1_withvaccinestrains.fas

