# Library pooling README
This subdirectory describes the initial pooling of the H1N1 library, the goal of this step is to balance representation of desired library strains in the final library in order to obtain sufficient coverage of each variant. Library pooling was performed according to method described in [Loes et al. 2024](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC10942427/).

Breifly, in order to balance the representation of strains in the library, we first generated an equal volume pool of all strains that we planned to include in the library. We then performed a dilution series of this pool on MDCK/SIAT1 cells and sequenced the resulting vRNA from infected cells 16 hpi.

The initial balancing of viruses in the equal volume pool was determined using the process_ratioslibrary_initialpool notebook included in this directory. However, analysis of this pool revealed some variation in virus yeilds related to the day that passaging was performed. The viruses were therefore repassaged together and repooled. The data and analysis in the process_ratioslibrary_repooledrepassaged show the calculated ratios to repool as determined with the repassaged strains. The repooled library was used in an MOI test with sera. These data are shown in plates 1-3. The MOIs used for subsequent assays was chosen based on linear range as determined from plates 1-3. A dilution of 1:22.5 was used for additional plates.

Two strains were not included in this initial pooling and repooling (A/Victoria/4897/2022_IVR238, and A/Oregon/Flu-OHSU-241140095/2023). These viruses were rescued after repooling and are spiked into the pool prior to running the assay with additional serum samples at the previously determined concentration according to the MOI tests.